---
title: How I GM Fate Accelerated for Metapowers
---

I will use the following options by default in new Fate campaigns and one shot games that feature super or metapowers. These options are taken from the Fate Core, Fate Accelerated, Fate Condensed, Fate System Toolkit, and Four Color FAE books.

## Fate Core default dials

- 5 Aspects: High Concept, Trouble, 3 others.

- Skills pyramid, peak at Great (+4).

- 3 Refresh (minimum Fate Points you start a session with.)

- 3 Free Stunts, additional stunts beyond this is cost 1 Refresh.

- 3 Consequence Slots: 1 Mild(2), 1 Moderate(4), and 1 Severe(6).

- Advancement: per Fate Core: https://fate-srd.com/fate-core/advancement-change

## Powers beyond those of mortal men

For characters who have meta-powers, we will be following the rules from the Fate expansion
book, [Four Color FAE](https://four-color-fae.gitbooks.io/four-color-fae/content/) by Bill Garrett and Mike Lindsey. 

The only addition to stock Fate Accelerated Edition (FAE) is the use of **Power Facts**.

Power facts are explained in the book better than I can:
> Power facts are an enumerated list of narrative permissions conveyed by one or more of these aspects. Like any other
> Fate Accelerated game, your aspects establish facts. You define your powers by writing down these facts ahead of time.
> 
> Your list of power facts should have 3 to 10 items. Each fact can be as detailed or as vague as you want. Some groups
> will prefer very specific definitions for a given power ("I can run at 320 mph"), while others will be comfortable with
> generalities ("I can run at super-speeds"). If the group discovers that a power fact - particularly things like immunity
> or invulnerability - is too vague or too specific, the power fact can be edited during play with the GM's permission.

Fate Condensed Skills list.
[https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/getting-started#skill-list](https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/getting-started#skill-list)

This skill list may be altered at time of setting or character creation.

## Stress tracks

Only 1 Fate Core style stress track (for combined Physical and Mental
stress) with a 1 stress box and a 2 stress box. (i.e. \[1\] \[2\])

Only a single stress box may be used to soak the shifts from a given
Attack.

## Stunts

Any of these stunts can be selected for a PC's free stunt slots, or at
the cost of 1 Refresh.

- Because I am **tougher than your average bear**, I get an extra
  Mild (2) Consequence slot that can only be used for physical
  consequences.

- **Tough as Nails**. Once per session, at the cost of a fate point, I
  can reduce the severity of a moderate consequence that's physical in
  nature to a mild consequence (if your mild consequence slot is
  free), or erase a mild consequence altogether.

## Initiative order

We will use popcorn initiative as described in the Turn Order section of
Fate Condensed.

[https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/challenges-conflicts-and-contests#turn-order](https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/challenges-conflicts-and-contests#turn-order)

> At the start of a scene, the GM and players decide who goes first
> based on the situation, then the active player picks who goes next.
> The GM's characters are selected in the turn order just like the PCs,
> with the GM deciding who goes next after the NPCs have acted. After
> everyone has taken a turn, the last player picks who goes next at the
> start of the next exchange.
