---
title: How I GM Fate for Metapowers
---

I will use the following options by default in new Fate campaigns and one shot games that feature super or metapowers.
These options are taken from the Fate Core, Fate Accelerated, Fate Condensed, Fate System Toolkit, and Four Color FAE
books.

## Fate Core default dials

- 5 Aspects: High Concept, Trouble, 3 others.

- Skills pyramid, peak at Great (+4).

- 3 Refresh (minimum Fate Points you start a session with.)

- 3 Free Stunts, additional stunts beyond this is cost 1 Refresh.

- 3 Consequence Slots: 1 Mild(2), 1 Moderate(4), and 1 Severe(6).

- Advancement: per Fate Core: https://fate-srd.com/fate-core/advancement-change

## Powers beyond those of mortal men

For characters who have meta-powers, we will be following the rules from the Fate expansion
book, [Four Color FAE](https://four-color-fae.gitbooks.io/four-color-fae/content/) by Bill Garrett and Mike Lindsey, but
with the Skills from Fate Condensed instead of the Approaches from Fate Accelerated.

Four Color FAE's only addition to stock Fate Core is the use of **Power Facts**, a very simple type
of [Extra](https://fate-srd.com/fate-core/extras).

Power facts are explained in the book better than I can:
> Power facts are an enumerated list of narrative permissions conveyed by one or more of these aspects. Like any other
> Fate Accelerated game, your aspects establish facts. You define your powers by writing down these facts ahead of time.
>
> Your list of power facts should have 3 to 10 items. Each fact can be as detailed or as vague as you want. Some groups
> will prefer very specific definitions for a given power ("I can run at 320 mph"), while others will be comfortable
> with
> generalities ("I can run at super-speeds"). If the group discovers that a power fact - particularly things like
> immunity
> or invulnerability - is too vague or too specific, the power fact can be edited during play with the GM's permission.

If the power does something that changes the mechanics of a Fate Core rule for some reason, I will require a stunt to be
taken to capture that changed mechanic.

Normally, to physically attack another character the Fight skill would be used, and the Athletics or Fight skill would
be used
to oppose that. If a telekinetic has the Power Fact, "Can move things using my mind," it might make sense to Attack with
Will,
instead, representing the attacking character's mental effort to physically effect the world. (The character being
attacked would
still oppose the attack with Fight or Athletics.) This skill swap (Will instead of Fight) would require a stunt to be
added to
the character sheet:

* Because I am an **experienced Telekinetic**, I can Attack with Will instead of Fight when I am using my TK to cause
  physical damage.

Fate Condensed Skills list.
[https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/getting-started#skill-list](https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/getting-started#skill-list)
This skill list may be altered at time of setting or character creation.

We will follow the guidelines about which skills can be used for which actions from the Fate Condensed
section "[Which skills can be used to attack and defend?](https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/taking-action-rolling-dice#which-skills-can-be-used-to-attack-and-defend-)":

> * Fight and Shoot can be used to make physical attacks.
> * Athletics can be used to defend against any physical attack.
> * Fight can be used to defend against melee physical attacks.
> * Provoke can be used to make a mental attack.
> * Will can be used to defend against mental attacks.
> 
> Other skills may gain permission to attack or defend under special circumstances, as determined by the GM or table
> consensus. Some stunts may grant broader, guaranteed permission when circumstances might otherwise not do so. When a
> skill can’t be used to attack or defend but might help with it, prepare for it by using that skill with the create an
> advantage action, and use the free invokes generated on your next attack or defend roll.

## Stress tracks

Only 1 Fate Core style stress track (for combined Physical and Mental
stress) with a 1 stress box and a 2 stress box. (i.e. \[1\] \[2\])

Only a single stress box may be used to soak the shifts from a given
Attack.

## Stunts

Any of these stunts can be selected for a PC's free stunt slots, or at
the cost of 1 Refresh.

- Because I am **tougher than your average bear**, I get an extra
  Mild (2) Consequence slot that can only be used for physical
  consequences.

- **Tough as Nails**. Once per session, at the cost of a fate point, I
  can reduce the severity of a moderate consequence that's physical in
  nature to a mild consequence (if your mild consequence slot is
  free), or erase a mild consequence altogether.

## Initiative order

We will use popcorn initiative as described in the Turn Order section of
Fate Condensed.

[https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/challenges-conflicts-and-contests#turn-order](https://fate-srd.com/fate-condensed/challenges-conflicts-and-contests#turn-order)

> At the start of a scene, the GM and players decide who goes first
> based on the situation, then the active player picks who goes next.
> The GM's characters are selected in the turn order just like the PCs,
> with the GM deciding who goes next after the NPCs have acted. After
> everyone has taken a turn, the last player picks who goes next at the
> start of the next exchange.
