---
title: Rules for ship to ship combat in a Fate Space Opera game
---

## References

-   Fate Space Toolkit - Space Combat -
    [https://fate-srd.com/fate-space-toolkit/space-combat-steps](https://fate-srd.com/fate-space-toolkit/space-combat-steps)

-   Fate System Toolkit - Scale -
    [https://fate-srd.com/fate-system-toolkit/scale](https://fate-srd.com/fate-system-toolkit/scale)

## Specifics

### Ship and Character Scales

There are 2 scale levels in this game: **Ship** **scale** and
**Character** **scale**.

**Ship** **scale** applies to actions taken by any large vehicle like a
space ship or a 747 jetliner.

**Character** **scale** applies to actions taken by characters.

Something at **Character** **scale** cannot affect something at **Ship**
**scale** unless there is something in play that allows them to act at
**Ship** **scale**. For example, firing your blaster pistol (**Character
scale**) at a space ship (**Ship scale**) does nothing. Using an
anti-aircraft gun (**Ship scale**) at a space ship (also **Ship scale**)
is allowed.

Something at **Ship scale** can affect something at **Character scale**.
A **Ship scale** weapon rolls to hit as usual, with a +1 to their roll
for aiming at something at **Character scale**. A successful hit just
takes out the character at **Character scale**, no need to track stress
or consequences.

### Ship Attributes

All ships and ship systems (unless otherwise noted) operate at **Ship
scale** and allow a character using the ship to take an action to also
operate at **Ship Scale**.

Ships also have 4 Attributes that are similar to Skills for a character:

-   Defence

    -   This is used similarly to the Physique Skill, to represent the
        size and mass of the ship. If the ship is not able to dodge,
        then the Defend roll against an attack uses the ship's Defence
        attribute. The Defense attribute is only used for reactive
        Defend rolls for the ship.

-   Movement

    -   This is used similarly to the Athletics or Pilot Skill, and
        represents the ship's ability to move and dodge using the ship's
        engines. Movement can be used for Overcome, Create an Advantage,
        or Defend actions.

-   Guns

    -   This is used similarly to the Shoot Skill, and represents the
        weaponry and targeting systems on the ship. Guns can be used for
        Overcome, Create an Advantage, or Attack actions.

-   Sensors

    -   This is used similarly to the Notice Skill, and represents the
        sensors and communications systems on the ship. Sensors can be
        used for Overcome, Create an Advantage, or Defend actions.

When taking action with the ship, if a PC is using the ship to do so,
they use their own skill, Pilot instead of Movement, Shoot instead of
Guns, and Notice instead of Sensors. If the ship has the matching
attribute and it is Average (+1) or higher, it can give a Teamwork bonus
of +1 to the character's roll.

### Determine Turn Order

We will use popcorn initiative to determine turn order

### Movement Rules

Use standard Fate Core rules for movement. Moving unopposed to an
adjacent zone is free. Otherwise, it takes a Pilot Overcome roll to move
more than 1 zone, or if opposed, or for any complex maneuvering, like
docking to a station, landing on a planet, or maneuvering close to
another ship.

### 
