---
title: Local Cluster Creation
---

A cluster is the star systems in the game. The local cluster is a small
subset of star systems that are connected together nearby the starting
star system. I'm going to stop saying "star system" and just use
"system".

Each system represents some place in space where people might reside. It
is a place where there is at least 1 FTL route connecting the system to
other systems in the local cluster.

Each player will create 1 system, naming it, determining its attributes,
and creating an Aspect or 2 about the system, and describing it in
narrative terms, then the systems will be linked to each other by FTL
routes.

I lifted this system from the [Diaspora
RPG](https://www.drivethrurpg.com/en/product/79933/diaspora),
and modified it to remove some Diaspora RPG setting specific verbiage.

## Name the system

Make up a name for the system. The system should start with a letter
that is unique amongst all the other systems created for the local
cluster.

## Determine attributes

Each system has 3 attributes:
[Technology]() (T),
[Environment]() (E), and
[Resources]() (R). Each attribute is randomly
generated by rolling 4 Fudge dice, adding up the pluses and subtracting
the minuses, giving a rating from -4 to +4. The definitions of what
those ratings mean are in the section [System attribute
definitions]().

## Create an Aspect or two

Players give each of their systems one or two Aspects that reflect their
unique identities, extrapolated from the attributes. This is best done
in consideration and discussion with others at the table---the final
result is under the control of the table authority (player ownership is
not strict, and the guy across the table might have the perfect wording
for your idea about what is driving your system).

The Aspects should describe things that are not represented by the
numbers or that are implied by the numbers.

## Link systems

Next, arrange the systems in a line.

![](media/image2.png)

| Roll | How to link                                                                                        |
|------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| \< 0 | Connect to next system.                                                                            |
| 0    | Connect to next system, and to the next unconnected system past the next system, if there are any. |
| \> 0 | Connect to next system, and to the next 2 unconnected systems past the next system.                |

In order from left to right, have the player who created each system
roll 4 Fudge dice. Connect the current system to other systems based on
the roll.

**Example:**

Player for system A rolls less than 0, links to next system B.

![](media/image1.png){width="7.088542213473316in"
height="0.996826334208224in"}

Player for system B rolls a 0, links to next system C and and next
unconnected system D after that.

![](media/image5.png){width="6.880208880139983in"
height="1.3975426509186353in"}

Player for system C rolls greater than 0, links to next system D, and
next 2 unconnected systems E and F.

![](media/image3.png){width="6.715543525809274in"
height="2.3879975940507436in"}

No need for the players for systems D or E to roll, as there are no more
unconnected systems, so just connect system D to the next system E, and
system E to the next system F.

![](media/image4.png){width="6.910343394575678in"
height="2.4083147419072617in"}

## Possible Changes to System

### **Attributes in systems seem too similar**

Vary the attributes more to increase the number of different
combinations of the system. The 4dF curve has a high probability of
getting a -1, 0, or 1, and systems in these range may seem to occur too
frequently.

Possible options to use instead of 4dF for each attribute:

- Use d5 - d5

- Use 5dF with a min/max of -4,4

- Use 6dF with a min/max of -4,4

- Use 3dF (range -3 to 3)

Here's [an anydice.com
program](https://anydice.com/program/38e60) showing the
probabilities for each of these, with 4dF for comparison, in black. I
think the d5-d5 and 6dF clamped to -4,4 would work best... with a slight
aesthetic preference for the bellshape curve of the clamped 6dF.

We could actually flatten it more by adding dice beyond 6... Here's a
program showing the same clamped Fudge dice probabilities for the number
of dice between 5 and 10. I like the 8dF option... 9 has almost the same
odds for rolling a 3 or a 4, and 10 dice has the 4s *more probable* than
the 3s, so that's right out.

### Environment requirements for many alien species should be different from humans

Allow the inclusion of planetary environments of non-human intelligent
species who have environmental requirements incompatible with humans.

This system has been pulled from a setting where there are no non-human
intelligent species, and the Environment attribute rank descriptions
reflect that. This is not a problem when used in other settings that has
non-human intelligent species in it, as long as it can be accepted that
all the intelligent species, including humans, need the same type of
environment.

If that seems implausible, then this system needs to be adjusted.

First this will require that the Environment attribute definitions for
Garden, Survivable, and Hostile worlds be changes to be generic to
different species requirements.

In addition some of the options to cover the specifics should be
selected.

- Build out a matrix of what these types of requirements would be. Add
  a fourth attribute to each system specifying the type of intelligent
  life environmental requirements the system supports.

- Add in more specific attributes for gravity, atmosphere type, and
  temperature, and for each intelligent species, specify the range of
  those attributes those species find compatible.

### Guard rails on cluster history

- It might be interesting to determine the order that each system link
  was discovered by any of the inhabitants of the systems.

  As each link is determined, roll and record a number between 1 and N
  for that link. That list of numbers is the order the links were
  discovered.

  Since each system has from 1 to 5 links, with the current process, N
  should be 5 times the number of systems in the cluster. If ties are
  rolled, re-roll until a unique number is found.

## System attribute definitions

### Technology

| Technology |                          |
|:----------:|--------------------------|
|     4      | On the verge of collapse |
|     3      | FTL mastery              |
|     2      | FTL use                  |
|     1      | Exploiting the system    |
|     0      | Exploring the system     |
|     -1     | Atomic power             |
|     -2     | Industrialization        |
|     -3     | Metallurgy               |
|     -4     | Stone age                |

Because of the nature of the game, the technology scale is privileging
space exploration technology over other technological advances.
Associated with each tech level is a whole host of other technological
advances, and these may be extrapolated in the world design, and may be
clarified with Aspects.

So a T2 system can create and maintain FTL ships, but what that means in
practice may vary from system to system: FTL ships might be commercially
available, or they might all be controlled by a system or planetary
government and used for military purposes only, for example.

#### T4 on the verge of collapse

T4 systems are very rare, and while they are interesting we don't say
much about them. They are on the verge of collapse---they are about to
unfold one or many failed dreams, spiraling into a transhuman ascension
indistinguishable from a multi-billion-death disaster. In most cases,
the person developing the system should pick one and that will give us a
taste of contact with these cultures, which should generally be
insular---already everyone else is looking as uninteresting as insects.
Here are some possibilities:

**Nanotech**: submicroscopic automation has been unlocked, eventually
resulting in a grey goo disaster. Early signs will be perfect health,
advanced self-repairing ships, and baffling body modifications.

**Unchecked intelligence**: artificial intelligence has been unlocked,
leading to systems that can improve themselves making some branches of
technology improve exponentially. Humans become servants to the machine
and the machine has inhuman motives. Eventually the humans and even the
physical manifestation of the machine will be irrelevant. This all eats
lots of power.

**Casual FTL**: the key to travel FTL unbound by FTL routes has been
discovered. Ships dump heat into "grey spaces" and some advanced vessels
may travel without reaction mass. Eventually, given the infinity of
possible "other" places, one is found that is vastly more appealing or
vastly more dangerous. Exeunt local humanity.

**Eternal life**: the culture has found a way to prolong life
indefinitely, but at what cost? Perhaps a race of eternal children
served by machines now completely devoid of any culture but
unsophisticated play. How do corporate raiders and pirates trade with
children\... children with super-technology weapons?

T4 doesn't need mechanical representation. Where it interacts
mechanically, it hasn't changed much. Where it has changed it always
dominates.

#### T3 FTL mastery

At this technology level FTL routes are easily reached both because
reaction-drive technology has become very efficient and because the
distance from the star can be much less, reducing transit time. Further,
this generates less heat than at lower technology levels.

Computer systems are now very advanced and communications systems are
powerful and pervasive. Power supplies can be very small with extensive
life spans, but the personal fusion power plant seems improbable. Ships
are very efficient and heat exchange systems use exotic mechanisms like
liquid sodium droplet collectors.

A culture at T3 will dominate a cluster unless it is ideologically
opposed to doing so or politically opposed by another T3 culture: they
have effective domination of space where they want it but it is likely
too expensive (or simply not profitable) to do so at every world in
every cluster. Instead they will protect what they perceive as their
interests. They might maintain a monopoly on technology or strive to
bring all cultures to their level. They might sell ships, lease them,
sell space on them, or even manufacture inferior vessels at a lower
effective technology rating for sale to preserve their dominance.

#### T2 FLT use

This culture has commercialized slipstream technology. It is expensive,
requires long travel and precise positioning and is only militarily
viable in special circumstances because of the extraordinary heat debt
slipstream usage accumulates.

T2 implies relatively cheap and light power and a regular familiarity
with space travel. At this technology it is feasible not only to travel
between stars, but also to trade between them. Within the system itself,
commerce will be vigorous thanks to the ready availability of effective
civilian spacecraft, and it can be expected that all habitable and many
partially inhabitable worlds will have permanent colonies and
industrial, military, or scientific outposts.

#### T1 Exploiting the system

This culture is able to commercialize the exploitation of its system.
Any habitable systems will likely be inhabited to some degree and any
resources can be exploited for trade or use. FTL technology is not
available but this culture can still trade with slipstream cultures
rather than be exploited by them, and likely buys or rents slipships or
at least space on regular routes.

#### T0 Exploring the system

This culture has sufficiently efficient spacecraft to explore their
system thoroughly. They cannot yet move huge amounts of cargo, so
commercialization is still a ways away, but colonies can be established
now on multiple worlds if they are sufficiently viable. This is a cusp
technology, ripe to be exploited by others yet ready to emerge as a
power on its own if given the chance. Much volatility potentially exists
here.

#### T-1 Atomic power

This culture can barely reach space---it may have sent some cumbersome
probes out and might have a few manned vessels capable of long journeys
on scientific voyages, but in general all of the action is planet-bound.
Power is readily available and information technology is taking off, but
reliance is on local resources. If the rest of the system is being
exploited by outsiders, the locals can detect them and complain, but
cannot mount any reasonable resistance. If it is profitable for others,
this culture may well be carefully suppressed from advancing further.
Information might be digitized. This is where Earth has been since the
1940s; while great advances in computer technology have changed things,
we have not moved off planet.

#### T-2 Industrialization

The industrialized culture is capable of mass production and local
exploitation, but power is still expensive and not widely available. The
primary world occupied is extensively explored but the rest of the
system is known only by records dating from before technology fell to
this level. If other systems are exploiting the other worlds of this
system, the locals may not even know about it. This corresponds to Earth
(European) technology in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

#### T-3 Metallurgy

This culture has fallen so far that it is only capable of basic
metallurgy. If there is power, it is supplied by machines that the
locals can no longer maintain and probably do not understand. Something
catastrophic must have pushed this culture so far back and the world
likely bears the scars of it. This technology band includes most of
Earth's technology from 3000 BCE to the eighteenth century---the bronze
age, the iron age, and into the modern period.

#### T-4 Stone age

This culture may not exist. If there are people at all here, they have
no useful technology to draw upon. Anything beyond simple tools
constructed from raw material on raw material must have been imported or
is an artifact from an earlier age. Note however, that this might
equally describe an outpost (scientific, commercial, military, or
otherwise) that has no intrinsic capacity for manufacture.

### Environment

| Environment |                                                         |
|:-----------:|---------------------------------------------------------|
|      4      | Many garden worlds                                      |
|      3      | Some garden worlds                                      |
|      2      | One garden world and several survivable worlds          |
|      1      | One garden and several hostile environments             |
|      0      | One garden world (and perhaps additional barren worlds) |
|     -1      | Survivable world                                        |
|     -2      | Hostile environment (gravity but dangerous atmosphere)  |
|     -3      | Barren world (gravity, no atmosphere)                   |
|     -4      | No habitable worlds at all                              |

Generally a high-environment system is going to see vast immigration.
How the local system inhabitants feel about that will drive regional
politics and adventure.

#### E4 Many garden worlds

This system is implausibly rich in habitable worlds. This could be a
random effect---perhaps several worlds occupy a broad biozone and their
moons are big enough to hold water and atmosphere. Or perhaps there are
multiple stars far enough apart to each support comfortable worlds.

Whenever we have a system with 4 in any stat it is worth exploring
extremes as they will generate play motivations reliably. Perhaps, for
example, the system is a ringworld---this would certainly satisfy the
"many garden worlds" criterion as it represents thousands or even
millions of times the surface area of a typical planet. Or maybe dozens
of worlds have been terraformed, some supplying their own heat from
advanced technologies no longer in evidence. Perhaps the star is
surrounded by a cultured rosette of five or more worlds, all in the same
orbit.

#### E3 Some garden worlds

This system has at least two worlds that are inhabitable by people at
ground level. These systems do not need an unnatural explanation, but
they might have one. Immigration will be substantial and, as with E4,
will be something that drives politics in the area (and beyond---the
places that people are coming from care about this effect as well).

#### E2 One garden and several survivable worlds

An E2 system has one world perfectly suited to habitation by people and
several that can be inhabited with some hardship. It's not necessary
that any particular technology be available to survive on the difficult
worlds, but there could be. The survivable worlds may represent
terraforming efforts from the past or those underway by current
governments. If Venus and Mars had turned out just a little differently
in our own system, it might qualify as E2.

Survivable worlds are intended to be extremes of human habitation: ice
worlds, desert worlds, or even water worlds fit this category.

#### E1 One garden and several hostile worlds

This is a comfortable system to occupy, simply because it's common
enough, it has a single world that easily sustains people at any level
of technology, and some of the other worlds may be amenable to
terraforming or relatively inexpensive occupation through technological
adaptation.

The hostile worlds in this system cannot be occupied without some
technology to counteract whatever makes them uninhabitable. They are
not, however, actively destructive to intelligent life. A vacuum world
that has minable water might be hostile. A world with very high
pressures, or one with a normal pressure but no oxygen would also
qualify. Extremes of cold or heat are fine. Europa in our own system, if
it contains liquid water beneath its icy and airless surface, would
qualify.

If there are no other high environment systems in the cluster then these
hostile worlds may well be filling up with claim-stakers and squatters.

#### E0 One garden world (and perhaps some barren worlds)

The most common system environment classification, this represents a
system with a single world capable of comfortably supporting habitation
without special tools.

Any other worlds in this system are uninhabitable without significant
technological support. These other worlds are likely low gravity, no
pressure, and probably have either no water or water locked up in
underground ice. While hard to use for civilians, they might support a
military or trading base.

#### E-1 Survivable world

This system contains a single habitable but unpleasant world. The world
may be defined by extremes of temperature, water availability, weather,
pressure, or some other factor, but it has breathable air at the surface
and water in sufficient quantities to support life. No other world in
the system is anything but an airless rock.

Aside from the story of emigration that is likely a constant problem,
another question that might have adventures as an answer is, "Why was
this system colonized in the first place?" Did it look better than this
from survey? Did it used to be more inhabitable and its current state
was caused by some human effect (war, pollution, botched
terraforming...)? Or were the original colonists desperate and willing
to take the bottom of the barrel from the survey lists? Why?

#### E-2 Hostile environment (gravity but dangerous atmosphere)

This system has a single world that can reasonably support a population
and that world is hostile to it. If this world does not sustain a
technology of T0 or higher, then the technology the population needs to
survive is not indigenous, and that's a story in itself. These worlds
are not vacuum worlds and there is gravity, but the atmosphere does not
support human life, or the temperatures are too extreme to be mitigated
by simple clothing, or there is no water to be had short of chemical
extraction from more complex molecules.

People are almost certainly leaving this system unless it has some
wealth in resources or technology or both.

#### E-3 Barren world (gravity, no atmosphere)

An E-3 system is desolate. The only planet remotely viable for
colonization contains no air and any water to be had must be mined or
chemically extracted. If the local technology is below T1, then the
technology that supports the local population must not be indigenous. It
may be an asteroid belt.

#### E-4 No habitable gravity or atmosphere

This system may as well be filled with gravel. There are no worlds
worthy of the name. It is entirely likely that this system has no
regular habitants at all and that any technology rating suggests the
capabilities of the occasional scientific or military outpost. Anyone
living here is living in a man-made structure in space.

### Resources

| Resources |                        |
|:---------:|------------------------|
|     4     | All you could want     |
|     3     | Multiple exports       |
|     2     | One significant export |
|     1     | Rich                   |
|     0     | Sustainable            |
|    -1     | Almost viable          |
|    -2     | Needs imports          |
|    -3     | Multiple dependencies  |
|    -4     | No resources           |

The resource value of a system is what drives the economy. It tells you
if the system is economically dependent on other systems, or if it is
supporting them. In order to cultivate a story for a system, invent the
flow of trade in this way: every system with a R-2 or less is getting
something from somewhere, and every system with an R2 or more may very
well be the source. Knowing what these economic factors are should
create plenty of room for competing interests and establish some
conflicts between systems.

#### R4 All you could want

R4 systems are packed with valuable metals, minerals, and other precious
things. They are studded with ice-laden asteroids, heavy-metal rich
rings around relatively quiescent planets or other gravity wells, are
showered with convertible radiation, and megatons of cheap r-mass are
everywhere. The question you want to answer about any given R4 system
is, "How did this happen?" Because this is atypical in the extreme.

Such a system might be home to one or more very-high-density
objects---perhaps a neutron star or even a black hole. These things may
well be very dangerous indeed, even though there are riches to be had
here by side effect. This site may be the remnant of a vast and recent
supernova. Whatever makes this place so rich, it is extreme and
improbable.

The one thing that is certain about an R4 system is that someone is
getting rich. If the locals are equipped to mine it, then they are
either rich or at war. If they are not equipped to mine it then someone
else is or they are leasing the technology to do it themselves. The fate
of this system may rely heavily on its most powerful neighbours---a T3
system might own this place or it might protect it as part of its
concord, keeping all members rich.

There is enough here to make the entire cluster wealthy, provided
everyone is happy with their share. Consequently no such system is
entirely wealthy.

#### R3 Multiple exports

A system this rich has far more than it needs. If it has the technology
to do so, then it is exporting either raw material (at the low end of
the technology scale) or manufactured goods (if it is lucky enough to
have a high technology compared to the rest of the culture). If its
technology is not space-faring then it may be leasing slipships and
trying to get there on its own. There's enough here for plenty of
systems to stay wealthy.

#### R2 One significant export

An R2 system has more than it needs---either a little more of everything
or a lot more of one thing. This system is possibly the only place in
the cluster with more of a particular valuable commodity than anywhere
else. There's not enough here to start a war over, unless the rest of
the cluster is especially resource-poor. If the locals don't have the
technology to exploit it then someone else does.

#### R1 Rich

This system may be an active trader in cluster-wide commodity markets if
its technology level is sufficient. Even if the technology is low there
will be an active trade in rights to spacefaring neighbours to exploit
the outer system, simply because taking things by force is not all that
profitable for the minor gains in an R1 system.

#### R0 Sustainable

A sustainable system like this is generating no particular surplus but
no particular needs, either. It gains nothing by exporting, importing,
or licensing operation inside its boundaries and regardless of its
technology rating, it has enough of everything it needs. An R0 system
may become quite insular---having no extremes of need or surplus, it may
not interact with the rest of the cluster at all.

#### R-1 Almost viable

R-1 systems are lacking something. This may explain their technological
lag or be a focus of their technological excess. It might explain their
poor environment or technology. If other stats are high, then they will
be the source of trade for the missing resource. R-1 systems are
low-pressure sources of trade conflict.

#### R-2 Needs imports

At R-2, however, the pressure for conflict becomes high: this system
cannot sustain itself without some imports. If it has nothing to trade
then it is failing. If it has something to trade then it is doing so and
probably not on favourable terms. Consequently R-2 systems are likely
embroiled in conflict (though not necessarily military) both internally
and externally.

#### R-3 Multiple dependencies

The R-3 system is completely at the mercy of its neighbours. It
absolutely requires imports to avoid rapid degeneration and must be
prepared to either fight for those imports, pay far too much for them,
or fail. At R-3 a system is desperate.

#### R-4 No resources

R-4 systems have nothing. It is so very unlikely that a system will have
absolutely no resources that it demands an extraordinary explanation.
Who swept this system clean? Using what technology? Or is it devoid of
minerals for natural reasons---perhaps this region of space is somehow
brand new, and this is a first generation star presenting no opportunity
for heavier metal production. If it was swept clean, why?

Why does a culture exist here at all? If it has positive values for
technology and/or environment, what does that mean? How is the
technology sustained---or is it?

## LICENSE

[Open Gaming License 1.0a](/rules-and-systems/license)